---
layout: post
title:  "Redundant Array Independent Disk (RAID)"
categories: ["os", "persistence"]
tags: ["os", "persistence"]
---

## What is RAID?

- A hardware RAID is a **computer system designed to manage a set of disks**.
- RAID technology has three basic functions:
  - Block access to data is achieved by **striping the data on the disk**, reducing the mechanical seek time and increasing data access speed.
  - Reading multiple disks in an array reduces mechanical seek time and increases data access speed at the same time.
  - **Mirroring** and storing **parity** information helps in data protection.
- RAIDs do their job **transparent** to the systems they are used on, so it looks like **a single big disk** representing itself as a linear array of blocks. It can replace a disk without changing a single line of software while the OS and user applications continue to work as before.

## Interface and Internal

### Interface

- A file system sees a RAID as **a single disk, a linear array of blocks** that the file system or client can read or write to.
- The RAID will issue one or more physical I/Os once it knows which disk (or disks) to access.

### Internal

- Microcontrollers that run firmware to **control the RAID**
- Volatile memory (DRAM) to buffer data blocks **being read and written**
- Non-volatile memory (NVM) to **buffer writes safely**, and
- Parity calculations might even be done with special logic

## Evaluation

- **Capacity** - How much usable space is in N drives with B blocks each available to RAID clients?
- **Reliability** - Tolerance for disk failures for specified design.
- **Performance** - Performance is difficult to evaluate because it really depends on the workload(random, sequential) transmitted to the disk array.
- **Availability** - How available is the system for actual use?

## RAID Levels

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_RAID_levels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_RAID_levels)
