---
layout: post
title:  "I/O Device"
categories: ["os", "persistence"]
tags: ["os", "persistence"]
---

## What is I/O Device?

The objects that CPU handles that **are not memory**, and are **connected to a computer system**. e.g.

- SSD
- Keyboard
- Network

## The Bus

A bus is a system for **transferring data between components** inside a computer or between computers.

### Bus Hierarchy for I/O

- Some devices, like graphics and high performance I/O devices are connected to the system using a **general I/O(faster but higher cost)** bus like a PCI.
- **Peripheral buses(slower but lower cost)** like SCSI, SATA, and USB are used to connect slower devices like disks, mice, and keyboards.

## A Canonical Device

### Interface and Internal 

- Hardware, like software, has to use some kind of interface that **lets the system software control its operation**. All devices have a specific interface and protocol for normal interactions.
- The internal structure of the device is implementation-specific, and it’s in charge of putting the device’s abstraction to work for the system. Like having a mini-computer dedicated to one task.

### The Canonical Protocol

#### Interface

- **Status Register** - Is read to check the devices current status
- **Command Register** - Used to tell the device to do a particular job
- **Data Register** - Used to send/receive data to/from the device

#### How the OS interacts with a device

```c
While (deviceStatus == busy); // wait until device is free
// Write some data to DATA register
// Write some command to COMMAND register
(start device and execute command)
While (deviceStatus == busy); // wait until device is finished
````

## Lowering CPU Overhead With Interrupts

Instead of constantly polling the device, the OS can use an interrupt to:

- Send a request
- Put the calling process to sleep, and
- Switch the context to another job.

When the I/O request is finished, it **sends a hardware interrupt and makes the CPU go into the OS to a specific interrupt handler**. This handler is **OS code that will complete the request, wake up the process that’s waiting for I/O to finish, and lets it continue about its merry way**.

Interrupts aren’t always the best choice: We have to consider **the time overhead of interrupt, handle the interrupt, and context switch**.

- If the device does it’s job fast, polling may be the better option.
- If it is slow enough to allow for overlapping, interrupts might be your best bet.

## Moving Data With DMA

### Programmed I/O (PIO)

The CPU wastes time **manually transporting data between devices** using **programmed I/O (PIO)**. Each data item transfer is initiated by **an instruction in the program**, involving the CPU for every transaction.

### Direct Memory Access (DMA)

A Direct Memory Access (DMA) engine is a system component that **handles transfers between devices and main memory without relying so much on the CPU**.

- The OS tells the DMA engine **where and how much data to copy and what device to send data to**.
- Now, the OS is finished with the transfer and can go on to other tasks.
- The DMA engine raises an interrupt when it’s finished, letting the OS know that the transfer is done.

## Methods Of Device Interaction

- Having **explicit I/O instructions** that define how the OS delivers data to specific device registers.
- **Memory-mapped I/O**:
  - This makes **device registers available like they were memory addresses**.
  - To access a specific register, the OS **issues a load (to read) or store (to write) address**.
  - The hardware then delivers the **load/store to the device instead of main memory**.

## How to integrate devices with special interfaces into an OS that we want to make as general as possible?

- A **file system (or application) doesn’t care about disk class**.
- It just sends **read and write requests** to the **generic block layer(POSIX: open, read, write, close, etc)**, which routes them to the **appropriate driver(SCSI, ATA, etc)**.
- Certain programs can **read and write blocks directly without needing the file abstraction**. Most systems support low-level storage management applications using this interface.

## References

1. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programmed_input%E2%80%93output](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programmed_input%E2%80%93output)
2. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory-mapped_I/O_and_port-mapped_I/O](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory-mapped_I/O_and_port-mapped_I/O)
